# S3 - Simple Storage Service

S3 is an object (key-value) based storage system for storing files.

1. A single file can be from 0 Bytes to 5 TB
2. Provides you with unlimited storage
3. Files are stored in buckets
4. Bucket names must be unique
5. Successfully uploading a file to S3 will result with a 200 status code
6. Supports file versioning
7. Supports metadata on files

8. Built for 99.99% availability
9. Amazon guarantee 99.9% availability
10. Amazon guarantee 99.99999999999% durability (11 x 9s)

## Data Consistency

**Read after Write Consistency**

Read after Write Consistency affects new file.
It means the file is immediately available after creating it.

S3 uses the PUT action to create a new file or update an existing file.
However, 'read after write consistency' only applies to NEW files created, not files being updated.
This means that any new file created will be immediately available to be read.

**Eventual Consistency**

Eventual Consistency affects updates and deletes.
It means the action (update / delete) will take some time for it to affect the file and is not performed immediately.

## Basics

1. Tiered Storage (i.e glacier)
2. Lifecycle Management (i.e delete files after 30 days)
3. Encrpytion
4. Subresources -
   1. Access Control Lists (ACL)
   2. Bucket Policies
   3. Cross Origin Resource Sharing (CORS)
   4. Transfer Acceleration

## Storage Classes / Tiers

Storage Classes (or Tiers) are different types of classes that may be assigned to a file.
If no storage classes is deteced during creating, the standard storage class will be used.

There are 5 different Storage classes

1. Standard -
   1. Used on files that are accessed on a daily bases
   2. 99.99% availability (highest of all classes)
   3. 99.99999999999% (11 x 9s) durability (highest of all classes)
2. Reduced Redundancy Storage (RRS) -
   1. Used on non-critical files that you may have backedup but still access on a daily bases
   2. Has 99.99% durability
   3. 99.99% availability
   4. Used for thumbnails (whilst the actual images are stored using Standard class)
   5. No longer recommended by Amazon to use this class but rather the Standard class (which is now also more cost effective)
3. Infrequent Access (S3 IA) -
   1. Used on files that accessed every few months but still need them immediately when needed
   2. Lower feww than S3 Standard
   3. Charged whenever the files are accessed
4. One Zone Infrequent Access -
   1. Same as IA but data is stored in a single Availability Zone
   2. Still has 99.99999999999% (11 x 9s) durability
   3. Only has 99.5% availability, unlike Standard class
   4. Cost is 20% less than IA
5. Glacier -
   1. Used on files that never need to be accessed
   2. Accessing glacier files will require 3 to 5 hours before retrieval
   3. Used for old hospital records
   4. Is the cheapest of all classes

## Intelligent Tiering

S3 Intelligent Tiering is a new storage class tier used for unknown or unpredictable access patterns.
This class will automatically move your data to the most cost-effective tier based class depending on how frequently you access each objest.

If an object is not used for 30 days, it will be moved to the infrequent Access tier
A small fee is included for this automation: \$0.0025 per 1,000 objects

It holds 2 tiers:

1. Frequent Access
2. Infrequent Access

Both Tiers Durability: 99.99999999999% (11 x 9s)
Both Tiers Availability 99.9%

## Charges

You are charged a fee for each action performed below:

1. Storage per GB
2. Requests (GET, PUT, COPY, etc.)
3. Storage Management Pricing -
   1. Inventory, Analytics and Object Tags
4. Data Management Pricing -
   1. Data transferred OUT of S3 such as downloading a file from S3 (not charged for data transferred INTO S3)
5. Transfer Acceleration
   1. Use of CloudFront to optimize transfers

## Security

1. By default, all newly created buckets are private
2. Access to buckets are granted through Bucket Policies
3. Bucket Policies -
   1. Applied at the bucket level
   2. It grant access to the entire bucket and cannot deny access to a certain file within that bucket
4. Access Controll Lists (ACL) -
   1. Applied at the object level
   2. It defines which accounts can perform which action on an object
5. S3 Buckets can be configured to create access logs, which will log all requests made to the S3 bucket. These logs can be written to another bucket

## Encryption

2 Types of encryption:

1. Encription in Transit -
   1. SSL/TLS (basically HTTPS)
   2. Encription in Transit is when files are encrypted during the process of uploading files from your desktop to S3 or vice versa
2. Encription at Rest -
   1. Server Sider Encryption (3 types):
      1. SSE-S3 Managed Keys: Each object is encrypted with its own unique key. The key is also encrypted with a master key that is rotates. Keys are managed for you by AWS
      2. SSE-KMS - AWS Key Management Service: Works with an envelope key and comes with an audit trails, show logs of the key. Keys are managed for you by AWS
      3. SSE-C - Server Side Encryption with Customer Provided Keys: AWS manage the encryption but you manage the keys
   2. Client Side Encryption -
      1. You manually encrypt the files yourself before uploading them to S3

**Enforcing Encryption**

1. If the file is to be encrypted at upload time, the x-amz-server-side-encryption parameter will be included in the request header
   1. Options available:
      1. x-amz-server-side-encryption: AES256 (SSE-S3 Managed Keys)
      2. x-amz-server-side-encryption: ams:kms (SSE-KMS - KMS Managed Keys)
2. To deny any request not using encryption, create a bucket policy rejecting any S3 PUT request not containing x-amz-server-side-encryption in the header

## Performance Optimisation

1. Use CloudFront
